Now that 2023 comes to a close, it’s a fitting time to look back at some of the technologies that were supposed to take over the world.

Number 1: hashtag#metaverse. The vision of a social VR-driven digitally immersive world, isn't really going to take off. While the core foundation relying on open technologies was a good starting point, the idea of entities like Meta controlling the “social” layer of the Metaverse doomed it from the beginning. Were these companies genuinely expecting consumers to pay for legless avatars, digital sneakers, or funny hats just to hang out in a virtual space? It appears not, given the success so far, much less when the price of entry is so steep (a VR headset with limited battery life and a propensity to induce motion sickness for those who haven’t spent enough hours using one), and when tangible benefits for consumers are absent.

The closest thing we currently have to consumer metaverse is hashtag#Fortnite. While it at least serves a purpose — gaming, it also ticks all the negative boxes: it's a closed ecosystem owned by a single entity, sells digital goods exclusive to Fortnite (and is making billions through them!), and to make matters worse, it’s also addictive and competitive. However, the dominance of Fortnite’s metaverse is so extensive that most companies focused on the consumer metaverse space are either giving up, or should give up [1] (side note: when will Meta give up?)

While I think that consumer metaverse has no future, I still think that there are legitimate scenarios for "metaverse" in the enterprise space, such as social interactions (virtual meetings, events), learning, prototyping, and industrial operations among others [2]. However, in my opinion, these are closer to advanced AR/VR use cases supported by powerful compute, 3D and AI technologies rather than having anything to do with the core concepts of the metaverse as originally envisioned, but they’re still valid use cases nonetheless for which we’re seeing significant traction in the industry.

Reflecting on things, I hope that the industry learns a lesson here. The idea of using cool and open tech to enable more immersive experiences had potential, but it became so distorted that all that was left of it was about making gullible consumers pay for intangible services. Not a very good value proposition in my book.